Bruce Bower
1. Psychologist Yueh-Ting Lee received an electronic mail message several years ago that included some barbed observations about the quality of life in several countries. "Heaven is a place with an American house, Chinese food, British police, a German car, and French art." Lee's correspondent wrote, "Hell is a place with a Japanese house, Chinese police, British food, German art, and a French car."
2. While these national stereotypes fall short of absolute truths, asserts Lee of Westfield (Mass.) State College, they are accurate enough to give the aphorism its humorous punch. Houses in the United States indeed boast more space, on average, than Japanese dwellings. A Chinese inn probably holds greater culinary potential than a British pub.
3. In this respect, stereotypes, rather than representing unjustified prejudices, typically function as thought-efficient starting points for understanding other cultures and social groups, as well as the individuals who belong to them. Lee holds.
4. "Stereotypes are probabilistic beliefs we use to categorize people, objects, and events," Lee proposes. "We have to have stereotypes to deal with so much information in a world with which we are often uncertain and unfamiliar."
5. Many psychologists find this opinion about as welcome as a cut in their research grants. They view stereotyping as a breeding ground for errant generalizations about others that easily lead to racism, sexism, and other forms of bigotry.
6. In the realm of stereotypes, intelligence gives way to misjudgment, maintains Charles Stangor of the University of Maryland at College Park. People employ stereotypes mainly to simplify how they think about others and to enhance their views of themselves and the groups to which they belong. Stangor holds. In the hands of politically powerful folks, stereotypes abet efforts to stigmatize and exploit selected groups, he adds.
7. Stangor's argument fails to give stereotypes their due as often helpful, it not absolutely precise, probes of the social world. Lee responds. He contends that a growing body of research suggests that in many real-life situations, stereotypes accurately capture cultural or group differences.
8. For more than 60 years, scientists have treated stereotypes as by definition erroneous, illogical, and inflexible. This view was voiced in journalist Walter Lippman’s 1922 book _Public Opinion_, in which he argued that stereotypes of social groups invariably prove incomplete and biased.
9. In the 1950s, psychologist Gordon W. Allport characterized stereotypes as invalid beliefs about all members of a group. Allport treated the opinion "all Germans are efficient" as a stereotype, but not "Germans, on average, are more efficient than people in other countries." Debate arose at that time over whether some stereotypes encase a "kernel of truth".
10. Lippman's fear that stereotypes cause social harm gained particular favor after 1970, as psychologists rushed to expose errors and biases in social judgments. Recently, however, psychologists have shown more interest in delineating the extent to which decision making proves accurate in specific contexts.
11. Lee’s approach to stereotypes falls squarely within the focus on accuracy of judgment. His interest in how people comprehend ethnic and cultural differences intensified after he emigrated from China to the United States in 1986 to attend graduate school. At that point, he began to suspect that a keener scientific understanding of stereotypes might have valuable applications. For instance, Lee asserts, efforts at conflict resolution between ethnic groups or nations may work best if both sides receive help in confronting real cultural differences that trigger mutual animosities.
12. "Group differences, not prejudice, are the root cause of tension and conflict between various cultural and racial groups," he contends. "The most effective way to improve intergroup relations is to admit and to discuss frankly the existing differences at the same time explaining that there is nothing wrong with being different."
13. Bridge-building efforts of this kind counteract the natural tendency to emphasize negative features in stereotypes, argues Reuben M. Baron of the University of Connecticut in Storrs. Humans evolved in groups that negotiated a dangerous world, he states. Our ancestors must have relied on stereotypes to marshal quick responses to potential threats, such as distinguishing predators from prey, friends from enemies, and fellow group members from outsiders. Baron asserts.
14. The ability to categorize individuals into "types" may also have been crucial for communicating with others as groups grew in size and complexity, Baron proposes. In large communities, stereotypes capitalized on people's propensity to fill social roles that match their own personal qualities. Warriors in an ancient society, for instance, might reasonably have been stereotyped as aggressive and unemotional, while storytellers and musicians were accurately tagged as expressive and friendly.
15. Despite their handiness, even accurate stereotypes can result in mistaken beliefs about others, according to Baron.
16. Consider the misunderstandings over punctuality that develop between Mexican and U.S. businesspeople. Lee says that north of the border, Mexicans get stereotyped as "the manana people" because of their tendency to show up for meetings considerably after prearranged times and to miss deadlines for completing assigned tasks. U.S. officials may see this trait as unforgivable deal breaking, whereas their Mexican counterparts—who do not dispute their own tardiness—deride Americans as "robots" who rigidly reach conclusions by specified dates before gathering all relevant data and fully grasping the issues.
17. Businesspeople from each culture perceptively categorize the behavior of those in the other group but misunderstand the cultural roots of their different time perspectives, Lee says. Such subtleties of stereotyping have gone largely unexplored, remarks David C. Funder, a psychologist at the University of California, Riverside. Most research of the past 25 years has tried to catalog the ways in which expectations about social categories distort a person’s judgment, usually by placing the individual in laboratory situations intended to elicit racial or sexual stereotypes.
18. This approach neglects to ask whether people in a wide array of real-life situations incorporate accurate information into their stereotypes, Funder holds.
19. "We desperately need to know which of the judgments we make of each other and of ourselves are right, which are wrong, and when," Funder contends.